so it's the queen of england's 70th
jubilee she has been on the throne
longer than any other monarch perhaps
ever as far as i know and although i say
the queen of england she really is the
queen of the commonwealth of nations and
that includes australia which is why i'm
interested in it it might be difficult i
imagine for americans among others to
really get a feel for what the monarch
means and what this queen in particular
means to people it's not like the
presidency people seem to have
diametrically opposed views of the
president at any given point in time but
when it comes to the queen
to the monarch of one of the nations in
the commonwealth the feeling is quite
different among the populace there is
this kind of paternalistic feel to the
queen she's like everyone's grandmother
to some extent but there's also a deeper
sense in which people who are not
anti-monarchists there's a sense in
which we value the sovereign in a
different way i have written myself
about this before
it's an evergreen issue almost in
countries like australia and that issue
is
why is the queen someone who was born in
britain the head of state in australia
now the truth is that in australia
although the queen is on our money on
our coins and on some notes and although
the crown is what we in legal terms
refer to as synonymous with the state
and although even our navy labels its
own ships hmis which stands for her
majesty's armored ships the fact is
that the queen's representative in
australia who is called the governor
general well that's where the actual
power resides
the power by the way is the power to
dismiss a government the governor
general or their delegate is the person
in australia who can dismiss our prime
minister and the rest of his cabinet in
the uk the queen can in theory remove
the british prime minister it's only
happened once in australia and i don't
know that it's ever happened in britain
now the issue that some anti-monarchists
have in australia as well as in britain
is that you have this
person who is not elected
holding a high office but this person
should not be regarded as a ruler the
monarch is not a ruler in the sense that
they do not set any rules they have a
specific capacity to make one important
decision the decision about whether or
not to allow the government to continue
to operate or to dismiss the government
and that's it they can't make up rules
unlike the actual rulers who are elected
and by the way
a lot of people in those democracies in
that government are rulers in the sense
that they couldn't can make up rules but
are not themselves elected these are the
bureaucrats so anyone who is concerned
about an unelected ruler supposed
unelected ruler like the queen or a
governor general should be far more
concerned about the bureaucrats in the
administration of these governments who
are themselves unelected and who go
about making all sorts of rules and
sometimes even thwarting the efforts of
the elected representatives to get their
policies enacted that can happen as well
that's far more of a problem than the
figurehead at the top the so-called head
of state now this system of democracy
that we have both in australia and
britain more or less we're very very
similar in this regard is the most
stable that has ever existed it has
fostered the fastest progress that has
ever happened here on earth it has
ushered through the british
enlightenment and the industrial
revolution times of philosophical
artistic scientific technological and
most importantly perhaps moral progress
and it britain this constitutional
monarchy has stood up to and overcome
fascism and communism and all sorts of
other kinds of authoritarianism
over the centuries and yet in australia
for example we do have people who we
call republicans it's not like the u.s
republicans it's not a political party
the republicans here are just anyone who
is an
anti-monarchist someone who doesn't like
the constitutional monarchy and instead
wants an elected president now there are
all sorts of problems with this the most
important perhaps is it concentrates
power in that head of state if suddenly
they're elected then they have by virtue
of the fact they simply are elected lots
more power lots more influence over
people but the monarch is not elected
the governor general is not elected in
the case of the latter they're appointed
by the government and in terms of head
of state well that term head of state
actually doesn't appear in the
australian constitution the position
head of state is supposed to label the
highest ranked person employed by the
government this is different to the head
of government which in australian
britain is the prime minister who is
basically the person who has the widest
array of powers to make decisions
the governor general the queen like i
say is limited to making basically one
decision of consequence only they cannot
enact policy they cannot enact rules and
in that sense they're not a ruler all
they can do is decide whether the
government can remain in power or not
and most of the time they allow the
government to remain in power because
there's no good reason to remove them
but republicans in australia argue not
only is the monarch not elected
but that the monarchy is outdated and
the head of state should be australian
i used to be among those who thought
this it seemed like common sense but
then i read more and thought more and
spoke to more people and realized that
this notion of the monarchy being
outdated is completely wrong the
monarchy as it exists now its
relationship to nations in the
commonwealth has evolved over centuries
it is now a modern outworking of
encountering various trials and tests
against the reality of a modern
political system and modern morality and
a modern global community of nations
operating by different principles and
what you get after centuries of progress
and the winning of wars and so on is the
constitutional monarchy we have now now
we in australia well the sensible people
we love places like the usa for example
to a far lesser extent we like places in
europe like france and
well
ireland maybe um it's very difficult to
list other places over there that are
really good examples of democracies but
places that have allowed for rapid
progress relative stability without
falling into tyranny now and again but
nothing much holds a candle in this
regard to a place like the united
kingdom
and its sons and daughters like canada
new zealand australia liberty stability
rapid progress a trifecta that no other
nations globally can be compared with
except perhaps the usa so for the
queen's jubilee i'm re-upping my article
that i wrote about five years ago called
republicans versus monarchists in
australia so go to the sub stack article
for that and see why i think a
constitutional monarchy as compared to
having an elected president is actually
better certainly for a place like
australia the monarchy is better and and
here now i'll just leave you with
the final few lines that i wrote in that
article i wrote quote
our constitutional monarchy maintains
the constant stability that allows for
the change that parliament brings
to remove that stability
that is the very thing that has
facilitated our dynamic society and so
removing it would be dangerous we then
have two seats of power
the parliament and the presidency both
subject to change the crown is the
dignified and the parliament is the
efficient said walter baghot in the
english constitution to separate out the
symbolic
versus the way things are actually
achieved
in modern science type language the
crown is the constant and the parliament
is the variable
we change this at our peril end quote so
in the uk the jubilee celebrations have
been huge over there there have been
performances and parties and all sorts
of things and i've been trying to watch
it from a distance over here in
australia missing all the action which
is unfortunate but one of the last
things i watched was a performance of
the band queen if you know the band
queen their hit song from the 70s i
think it was the 70s called we are the
champions anyway the queen the band as
it exists now performed that song
outside buckingham palace with the new
lead singer adam lambert and he was
belting out the lines quote
we are the champions my friends and
we'll keep on fighting till the end we
are the champions we are the champions
no time for losers because we are the
champions of the world end quote so goes
that song
and it was as if he was singing about
the uk itself he may as well have been
britain has always fought against the
darkness of tyranny of stasis of disease
war famine a lack of progress and so on
and on it goes they are champions of the
world so perhaps it's ironic to some
extent that me a person who leans more
libertarian by which i mean more
anti-authority and not pro-state or
pro-government or pro-authoritarian i
lean towards the monarchy because i
think it's the instantiation of power
dilution
the power of the monarch has been
diluted to almost nothing in law anymore
unlike the opposite impulse where state
power becomes more and more concentrated
especially in the unelected bureaucracy
in australia there's a real push right
now for a so-called icac an independent
commission against corruption i don't
know if americans have anything like
this
but this would be an unelected body that
has oversight over the entire federal
government and we have these
in state politics by the way we already
have in the state of new south wales and
icac an independent commission against
corruption who has the power to remove
to certainly investigate and then to
make it really uncomfortable politically
so ultimately remove
the head of the state you know our
premier and others as well and this icac
is separate to the police and the
federal archaic that some people want
want this administrative body separate
to other investigative bodies for the
purpose of having power over elected
officials
statists and bureaucrats administrators
people who work for the government love
this kind of thing because it removes
power from the elected and ports it into
the unelected officials who cannot be
easily removed by democratic vote and so
this is the problem in any democracy the
bureaucrats who are the government to
some extent to some real extent cannot
be removed easily by any election
elections come and go politicians come
and go but the bureaucratic apparatus
remains in place now as i've already
conceded and many monarch so-called
monarchies will concede the monarch
cannot be removed but with the monarch
they're not enacting policy they can't
make policy they can't
make rules and decisions unlike the
bureaucrats who can they can make policy
they can make rules they can ask for
those rules to be enforced and as i also
observe
sometimes these bureaucrats would seem
to have as much if not more power than
the elected ministers you just consider
someone like the head of treasury who
can delay the decisions made by the
elected treasurer for bureaucratic
reasons
okay enough of a rant on that for now
this weekend is a real celebration for
some of us about our special nations
that have experienced extended peace as
well as progress in large part because
of our system of government tyranny and
anarchy
cannot be expected to do better absent a
good explanation of how this would work
we have something of an explanation
about why democracies and why
systems like constitutional monarchies
work as well as they do it seems we have
these systems in place which are able to
achieve the solving of problems faster
than any alternative known i'll leave
that there and encourage you to read
through my article about monarchists
versus republicans in australia on a
related topic euron brook produced an
excellent podcast on the role of police
in society after the most recent school
shooting in texas where some of the
police apparently did not go in as
quickly as they might have there
appeared to be universal consensus that
these police were too selfish too
self-interested and this explained their
cowardice now when i first heard
this kind of analysis of what was going
on i thought to myself well no that
can't be it
it might very well be cowardice but
cowardice is not selfishness selfishness
in the iron round objectivist style
comes with pride the idea that i am good
and i am deserving because i have value
now if you're an officer of the state or
a soldier or someone else like that then
being truly selfish would mean seeing
your job as a protector
as having high value you've chosen to go
into this high value profession because
you think your life has high value so
you're doing things that have high value
so you would in theory selfishly seek to
guard the society that provides for such
a high value position that you can
occupy and you would seek to protect
people in that society because that's
all an extension of self but a person
with low self-esteem would hide and
cower in a way that is that is not
enlightened self-interest there's
nothing enlightened about
hiding in fear in situations such as
occurred with this texas shooting so
this is what i was sort of thinking as i
heard the talking heads on television
talking about this terrible tragedy but
then i turned on euron i thought well
he's definitely going to have something
interesting to say he produced a podcast
all about it and it was so well said
that i've really got nothing to add
beyond what euron has said and so i'll
link to
euron's podcast on this specific issue
in the substance and the the crucial
difference between euron's analysis and
everyone else's analysis on this that
i've heard anyway including by some
other prominent podcasters is that iran
has put values and ideals front and
center of the analysis of that terrible
event it's worth listening to all of
euron's podcasts are worth listening to
and everything he does seems to be
underrated and deserves far more
attention than it gets but this episode
in particular it's just a regular one he
dropped in the long list of podcasts he
has
is especially good on this particular
issue what euron did not mention but
which i was thinking
was that in the usa like some other
places there have been about two years
worth of people over the last two years
variously saying things like defund the
police and calling the police the enemy
and in some places police actually
behaving like the enemy certainly in
places like australia anyway where
excessive force has been in some cases
almost unquestionably
used by the police forces and so all of
that bad publicity perhaps bad behavior
poor public sentiment focused on police
has to be factored into this kind of
thing i think
where next minute after all of that
they're now being asked to save lives by
risking their own now it's no excuse
that they're not risking their own lives
by saving others but it's a factor isn't
it where these people have been
cast as villains and in some cases
behave like villains and then expected
to be the heroes now douglas murray was
on bill maher
on real time with bill maher as well a
few nights ago
and that's well worth watching the whole
episode if you can get a hold of it
somewhere and i'll link to a clip on
youtube where douglas is talking to bill
maher and one of douglas's comment on
this this issue of police cowardice
police not doing what apparently they
should was well for douglas to say
basically look as a police officer
you get to walk around with your head
held high
ordering people to do this that and the
other and generally getting to feel in
society like you're very important and
you are
but the social contract we have for
those people is that for all of that all
of that respect and the fancy uniform
and the way in which you get to comport
yourself and get to behave like you can
order your fellow citizens around now
and again well the flip side of all of
that is that now and again you just
might have to risk your life and it
seems right that's the deal going in you
get to have all of these extra
privileges on the one hand but on the
other now and again you're going to be
expected to do something that many
others are not expected to do that's the
deal finally for today i might just
mention my episode 119 of topcast it's a
bumper one it's 90 minutes worth
of me talking about work and heat an
introduction to thermodynamics work and
heat happens to be the name of chapter
six from chiara maletos the science of
canon can't but this doesn't contain any
readings from that the next episode will
but for this one well it's just supposed
to serve as an introduction to that
chapter for people who might not have
much of a background in thermodynamics
so
i'm trying to
present the material as you might get it
at university or at high school but
perhaps with a little bit of interesting
history and an interesting perspective
as well so that's my newsletter for now
until next time bye-bye